% Identifying Correlates of Pathogen Spatial Spread from Phylogenetic Trees Workshop
% Eamon O'Dea
% December 7, 2016

# What insights have phylogeographic analyses provided?

\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{sensitivity-vs-uncertainty.png}

<!---

Goal: After seeing this presentation, viewers will be aware of the
main types of phylogeographic methods currently available, their
relative strengths and weaknesses of these methods, and, for my
proposed method, be familiar with the main steps using it.

Advertisement: For a pathogen that evolves rapidly, the molecular
sequences of its lineages may become sprinkled with characteristic
features as they circulate through the host population. Statistical
methods are being developed to use these features to infer correlates
of the pathogen's spatial spread. This presentation will review some
of these methods and demonstrate how to apply one of them to a data
set consisting of molecular sequences and their collection times and
places. The demonstration will include steps to assess the likely
performance of the method on a particular data set.

Target length: 50 min, 6000--8000 words
--->

<div class="notes">
# Provides examples of some of the exciting results that
phylogeographic methods have generated

Sensitivity analysis is a term I often hear people use to mean
essentially a check that your results do not dramatically change when
you change your model parameters to account for the fact that you are
not sure what the best values for them are, but it has a broader
definition. In fact, you could argue that when used in the sense I
just described, the goal is to determine the ramifications of
uncertainty in model parameters on the model output. That type of
analysis might more accurately be described as uncertainty
analysis. By contrast, sensitivity analysis can more narrowly be
defined as determing the relationship between uncertainity in output
and uncertainty in input. Thus sensitivity analysis could be a
prerequisite of an uncertainty analysis. However, as the figure shows,
the outcome of your uncertainty analyis depends on both model
sensitivity and uncertainty in the inputs. If the range of inputs
differ, a model with low sensitivity can have greater uncertainty in
the output than a model with high sensitivity. Sensitivity is a
property of the model itself and could be used for things besides
uncertainty analysis such as a powers analysis (if your model output
is a test statistic) or a model reduction procedure. In this example
the sensitivity did not depend on the inputs but in general that is of
course not the case.

</div>

